---
title: 'new antitrust post'
author:
  - ef1fd78e-815e-4153-8251-f021a62d917d
updated_by: ef1fd78e-815e-4153-8251-f021a62d917d
updated_at: 1609089185
id: e071bd6f-a9a3-4e4e-b669-51cb419b85b8
published: false
---
In Anyn Rand's the Fountainhead Howard Roark is an architect of absolute integrity, totally self suficient. His buildings are like his personality: innovative and austere. He relies on himself alone and illustrates the primacy of the individual. It's like a 900 page book about how collectivism and governments screw everything up. It's the story of the noble capitalist. Since 2010 with the Citizens United ruling corporations get treated like people under the law. More recently we've had antitrust suits against Google and Facebook and congressional invistigations into Amazon and Apple. Antitrust cases are back in the original trustbusting spririt of Theodore Roosevelt. The last major antitrust case in American history was the Microsoft case. No antitrust cases were brought against any company in eight years of Bush presidency by the FTC. Hilary Clinton was going to name Sheryll Sandberg to her cabinet, a Facebook executive. The tech industry consolidation happened under Obama and Trump presidencies. The tech companies have won and we're here as a society where we have to figure out what to do about it. 

There are fantastic "Howard Roark" narratives about each of the major tech companies. Mark Zuckerburg built a company from a dorm room and beat out competitors like MySpace with a better product that respected privacy. Jeff Bezos built Amazon to define online shopping. Google with its page rank algorithm made the web easier to navigate. Apple builds a sleek operating system and remarkable phones. In a capitalist society these companies should not be punished for their success at building great products. These tech billionaires inspire tech industry workers with their success. Zuckerburg and Bezos have built their companies from nothing to become some of the richest men in America. They give to charity; they pay their taxes. One line of thinking posits, leave them alone, don't punish them for their success. They have the best products and services.

It's my opinion that it's the government's job to reign in unrestricted capitalism in order to preserve competition and prevent foul play. Concentrated corporate power restrains American's freedom. To illustrate that the government has a role in the economy we can look at the Micrsoft antitrust case of the 1990s. At the time of the Justice Department's suit against Microsoft, Microsoft controlled the personal computer operating system and crushed Netscape Navigator by bundling and giving away Internet Explorer with the Windows operating system for free. During the course of the 1990s the government investigated Microsoft culminating in a large scale antitrust lawsuit from 1998 to 2001. The Bush administration ended up dropping the case, allowing Microsoft to stay as one company. The Bush administration didn't pursue a single antitrust case in eight years of office. Though the case was unsuccessful in breaking up Microsoft it was effective in bringing more competition to the tech industry.

I'd like to invite you to consider an alternative reality. Imagine the government didn't bring a case against Microsoft. Bill Gates never had to testify about his business practices in court. The company was never concerned about government action in this alternate reality. Microsoft is a powerhouse. Windows runs on 95% of Personal Computers (PCs). The onramp to the nascent internet is accessed by internet explorer. Microsoft controls suppliers for hardware, the operating system and the browser. They can bully Venture Capitalists into not funding companies that'd compete with them. There's no way this Microsoft would let another company control internet search and eCommerce shopping. Because of government action though, Google and Amazon were able to emerge and thrive. Microsoft was focused on survival and startups flourished. It's ironic that Google and Amazon, today's tech titans owe their existence to the antitrust suit against Microsoft.

Going further back even Microsoft owes it's existence to the governemnt antitrust suits against IBM and AT&T. IBM was so preocupied with not being seen as a monopoly by the government they completely reversed course and built open architecture, helping startups succeed. Giving room for companies like Microsoft and Intel to grab a foothold. Government antitrust action can restore compition to marketplaces and release innovation. Startups need room to breathe, room to run in order to compete with incumbents. 

Looking forward, we can imagine a government that does not implement any antitrust laws. In this alternate future Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple all merge into one company. They control all mobile phones, all internet retail and all cloud computing services after they bought up or killed all their rivals. Exclusive business agreements make it nearly impossible for hardware manufacturers to work with anyone else. Like at the grocery store there are many options but they're all made by the same companies. Any startup or business that wants to succeed has to pay the existing companies. The lucky ones get bought up into the congolmerate, the rest are marginalized and killed. Retailers have no choice but to sell through this one tech company since they control all the phones, operating systems, browsers internet retail and search queries. Digital advertising and publishing all happen through and with the consent of this one company. As time goes on the founders die and and a new generation of leaders take the helm of this tech behmouth. Politicians live or die by the tech company's approval. The "don't be evil" and "connect the world" mantras are forgotten about. No company can compete. The barriers to entry are too high and business arangements with existing suppliers block new entrants. Technology and innovation stagnate. This tech monopoly controls the digital world, our devices, our information and our politics.

These tech giants are separate today but theoretically they could try and merge. Without a government to stop them it could make sense from their financial perspectives, afterall, in the words of Peter Theil [Competition Is For Losers](https://www.wsj.com/articles/peter-thiel-competition-is-for-losers-1410535536). A merger between today's tech titans would rule our economic and political lives. Without govenment action, a tech behmouth ruling our lives and economy could have been IBM through it's control of hardware and software. It could have been Microsoft through control of the PC, operating system and browser. A merger between Google, Facebook, Amazon and Apple would siphon off search, internet infastructure, online retail and mobile devices to the control of the few. There's resistance brewing to the power of these tech monopolists. The government filed antitrust lawsuits against Google and Facebook. Congress is investigating competition in Digital Markets, firing warning shots at Google, Facebook, Amazon and Apple. There are active campaigns by labor activists, politicians, scholars and business people to break up the major tech companies are restore competition to the marketplace.

What's wrong with one company ruling everything though? Google is an amazing search engine. Apple makes great phones. Amazon's retailing is unparalleled. These tech companies offer the best services in the market. Why can't they take over? There are a few things to consider here.

## #1 collusion

## #2 illegal business dealings

Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple are all separate companies that compete with each other. . If government has no role in regulating monopolies or only has the narrow scope of protecting consumer interests then what's to prevent the above tech conglomerate from happening? Or even hypothetically should it be able to happen? A tech company of this size could make everything free. Consumers could really benefit. 

## #3 overall fucked up shit




This line of thinking begs some important questions and glosses over the specific allegations the government's made against these tech companies. At the time of this writing there are major antitrust lawsuits pending against Facebook and Google. There's a congressional investigation into the competitive tactics Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple have used to preserve their dominance in digital markets. We'll address the specific laws the government alleges these tech companies broke later. One of the first questions to address though is "Do we live in the best of all possible worlds or could this world be better?". Do we trust that the capitalist market as it now stands has created the best world for the citizens of the United States? Will the market correct itself and restore competition? Does competition really matter? What's wrong with successful companies crushing their competitors?

To answer that question let's head way back into the days of Standard Oil, before the Sherman Act was passed in 1890.

 One important tool the U.S. government has at it's disposal to preserve market integrity is the antitrust suit.

 One philosophy holds that the market and the economy create the best possible circumstances. The government should get out of the way and let the rich rule. 

This was championed by Robert Bork in the 1970s

In 1978 Robert Bork published a paper called "The Antitrust Paradox" that rewrote history. In that legal paper Bork, a lawyer that President Ronald Regean later nominated to the Supreme Court, argued Congress didn't mean to protect American freedoms from rule by corporations when it passed the Sherman Act of 1890. It's a convienent argument for his radical positions that changed the shape of American politics. Bork argued that when Congress passed the Sherman Act (88 years before his paper was written) they only meant to protect consumers. That in fact the only goal of the Sherman Act was to potect "consumer welfare". In Brok's view if it doesn't hurt consumers then there's no antitrust violation.

Robert Bork has the most cited piece on antitrust. It defends corporations.



a Regean court nominee and more recently Peter Theil. I won't be able to do the full argument justice here but it basically holds that [Competition Is For Losers](https://www.wsj.com/articles/peter-thiel-competition-is-for-losers-1410535536). 

The market will naturally correct all ills. It's not the government's role to intervene in the economy. This school of thought has dominated U.S. government politics this century and before. Since 1978 the American discussion of political economy shifted from between the "haves" and "have nots" to between the "haves" and the "haves". The government paid Wall Street billions for the economic bailout of 2008. In 2010 corporations became people under the _Citizens United_ Supreme Court ruling.

Concentrated corportate power rules our lives in a way the founding fathers didn't forsee. Ince reinforced by Citizens United in 2010. Private corporations in concetrated industries. This 



The very idea of "political economy" seems to be replaced by banks that solicit goernment to bail them out. Economics is for specialists; the only cries in the alternative are somewhat lazy "capitalism is broken" calls. Inequality, student debt, unemployment and healthcare are straight up ridiculous and terrifying. There's something brewing in the alternative and it needs a political voice. 



The fact is that antitrust legislation was passed to protect against violations that today rule our everyday lives.

in 1890 when it passed the Sherman Act. It's the most cited book on antitrust because it protects the corporation. 

The technologies are different 


This is a pretty fundamental question for anybody and any field but today I'd like to discuss how it relates to political economy in the United States. There's the laisez faire view that the market's always right. This thought is embraced by Libertarians. We live in the best of all possible worlds and any intervention by the government into the world of business, let alone the tech business is bound to mess it all up. The Libertarian view subscribes that the ills in the world it's due to too much government. That's the libertarian view and there's a strong current running for it in Silicon Valley. This post is