---
title: 'What''s wrong with monopolies?'
author:
  - ef1fd78e-815e-4153-8251-f021a62d917d
updated_by: ef1fd78e-815e-4153-8251-f021a62d917d
updated_at: 1613923102
topics:
  - big-tech
  - monopoly
  - concentrated-corporate-power
id: 54cddab9-5531-4595-a3a8-e16aa7df06b4
published: false
---
Opposition story: https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/yes-google-has-a-monopoly-whats-wrong-with-that/2020/10/20/d2c0c022-1311-11eb-ad6f-36c93e6e94fb_story.html
- So the question to ask about the government’s case isn’t “Does Google have a monopoly over search?” but “Is search the market we should care about?” And then: “If so, can we undo the monopoly without making everyone worse off?”
- Certainly, without government intervention, the company will probably be able to maintain its overwhelming control over the search engine space — less due to anti-competitive side payments, as Justice suggests in the antitrust suit it filed on Tuesday, than to the structure of the market itself, which maximizes a competitive advantage known as “network effects.”
- Consider the telephone, which is the classic example of network effects: That’s network effects: a product that gets more valuable with each additional user.
- The more users, the more such information they get, and the better they can refine the answers they return. That makes it extraordinarily difficult to launch a competitor, because without as much search volume, results won’t be as accurate.
- There's stiff competition in the online ad market. (Pinterest, Snap, Twitter, Amazon).
- government: forbid the side payments to other companies that make Google the default search engine on your phone or browser
- everyone’s searches would probably become less accurate and useful than the ones we’re getting now (lack of vision. breaking up company spurs innovation)
- There are no costs to Google's monopoly.
- "government instead intervenes to prevent matters from taking their natural course"
- fight between a small number of people who might like to run a search engine and the large number of consumers who might rather they didn’t

> this is the first time we’re really seeing a nation actually attempt to force the platforms do something they don’t want to do



What's wrong with one company ruling everything though? Google is an amazing search engine. Apple makes great phones. Amazon's retailing is unparalleled. These tech companies offer the best services in the market. Why can't they take over? There are a few things to consider here.

## #1 collusion

## #2 illegal business dealings

Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple are all separate companies that compete with each other. . If government has no role in regulating monopolies or only has the narrow scope of protecting consumer interests then what's to prevent the above tech conglomerate from happening? Or even hypothetically should it be able to happen? A tech company of this size could make everything free. Consumers could really benefit. 

## #3 overall fucked up shit




This line of thinking begs some important questions and glosses over the specific allegations the government's made against these tech companies. At the time of this writing there are major antitrust lawsuits pending against Facebook and Google. There's a congressional investigation into the competitive tactics Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple have used to preserve their dominance in digital markets. We'll address the specific laws the government alleges these tech companies broke later. One of the first questions to address though is "Do we live in the best of all possible worlds or could this world be better?". Do we trust that the capitalist market as it now stands has created the best world for the citizens of the United States? Will the market correct itself and restore competition? Does competition really matter? What's wrong with successful companies crushing their competitors?

To answer that question let's head way back into the days of Standard Oil, before the Sherman Act was passed in 1890.

 One important tool the U.S. government has at it's disposal to preserve market integrity is the antitrust suit.

 One philosophy holds that the market and the economy create the best possible circumstances. The government should get out of the way and let the rich rule. 

This was championed by Robert Bork in the 1970s

In 1978 Robert Bork published a paper called "The Antitrust Paradox" that rewrote history. In that legal paper Bork, a lawyer that President Ronald Regean later nominated to the Supreme Court, argued Congress didn't mean to protect American freedoms from rule by corporations when it passed the Sherman Act of 1890. It's a convienent argument for his radical positions that changed the shape of American politics. Bork argued that when Congress passed the Sherman Act (88 years before his paper was written) they only meant to protect consumers. That in fact the only goal of the Sherman Act was to potect "consumer welfare". In Brok's view if it doesn't hurt consumers then there's no antitrust violation.

Robert Bork has the most cited piece on antitrust. It defends corporations.



a Regean court nominee and more recently Peter Theil. I won't be able to do the full argument justice here but it basically holds that [Competition Is For Losers](https://www.wsj.com/articles/peter-thiel-competition-is-for-losers-1410535536). 

The market will naturally correct all ills. It's not the government's role to intervene in the economy. This school of thought has dominated U.S. government politics this century and before. Since 1978 the American discussion of political economy shifted from between the "haves" and "have nots" to between the "haves" and the "haves". The government paid Wall Street billions for the economic bailout of 2008. In 2010 corporations became people under the _Citizens United_ Supreme Court ruling.

Concentrated corportate power rules our lives in a way the founding fathers didn't forsee. Ince reinforced by Citizens United in 2010. Private corporations in concetrated industries. This 



The very idea of "political economy" seems to be replaced by banks that solicit goernment to bail them out. Economics is for specialists; the only cries in the alternative are somewhat lazy "capitalism is broken" calls. Inequality, student debt, unemployment and healthcare are straight up ridiculous and terrifying. There's something brewing in the alternative and it needs a political voice. 



The fact is that antitrust legislation was passed to protect against violations that today rule our everyday lives.

in 1890 when it passed the Sherman Act. It's the most cited book on antitrust because it protects the corporation. 

The technologies are different 


This is a pretty fundamental question for anybody and any field but today I'd like to discuss how it relates to political economy in the United States. There's the laisez faire view that the market's always right. This thought is embraced by Libertarians. We live in the best of all possible worlds and any intervention by the government into the world of business, let alone the tech business is bound to mess it all up. The Libertarian view subscribes that the ills in the world it's due to too much government. That's the libertarian view and there's a strong current running for it in Silicon Valley. This post is