---
title: 'government and corporations'
excerpt: 'Fascism means an allegiance between corporations and the state. In this post we''ll cover what fascism is and how it relates to American politics today.'
author:
  - ef1fd78e-815e-4153-8251-f021a62d917d
updated_by: ef1fd78e-815e-4153-8251-f021a62d917d
updated_at: 1610856107
id: 0830f072-167f-49ff-b55b-5e5f8f0561e7
published: false
---
The terms "fascism" and "fascist" gets thrown around a lot on the internet today. Fascism means an allegiance between corporations and the state. In this post we'll cover what fascism is and how it relates to American politics today.

## A bit of backstory

I try not to get worked up about politics, which is a funny thing to say at the beginning of an article all about politics. I studied political science at UCSB because the classes were interesting. I picked it on my college applications cause I liked english class the most and I had to pick something. Since graduating I've worked mostly in software programming and recruiting. My Dad majored in History from San Francisco State in the late 60s early 70s. He escaped the Vietnam draft through a wool allergy (he had a low draft number). Both his dad and his granddad fought in World War 2. My Dad studied Italian fascism in college and he told me standing there in the garage that fascism is an alleigance between business and the state, that's all. People load it up with additional meaning but at it's core fascism as a system of government is about an alleigance between corporations and the government.

## What's the government's relationship with corporations?

On it's surface it's tempting to read fascists as the same as rascists, totalitarians, hate groups cause there is a lot of that. But I think it's more fruitful to think of fascism as a concept and examine the threat to our current system of government from that angle. There's something coming for us, as was clearly illustrated this week with the looting of the capitol building. Are these system of government questions new? Where do the political parties lie?

In the presidential election of 1912 Theodore Roosevelt ran for President under "New Nationalism" policy. He lost that year, the last of his career but ultimately lost to Woodrow Wilson's "New Freedom" platform. The election of 1912 might seem like irrelevant history but it's not. Joshua David Hawley wrote [a book about Theodore Roosevelt](https://www.amazon.com/Theodore-Roosevelt-Preacher-Righteousness-2015-03-27/dp/B01K93YC5Q/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=) and was also the first Senator to oppose certifying Joe Biden's electoral win.

Under Theodore Roosevelt's New Nationalism plan

## How to treat private companies is a field of study I've recently learned about 

## What is fascism? Who is a fascist?

Depends on who you ask. Everyone's calling everyone a fascist for everything these days.

## Why is fascism bad?

I hate to even use the German political party word that drops into every other political conversation, but they were fascists. So there's that. first off. There's also Benito Mussolini who famously "made the trains run on time". Mussolini is the trademark fascist leader. My granddad's 




Fascism is a World War 2 term to describe alleigance between business and the state. It's loaded up today with atrocities

## Resources
https://mattstoller.substack.com/p/the-new-populist-right-imagines-a